Add EIP: Hardware and Bandwidth Recommendations (#9270)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/draft_hardware_and_bandwidth_recs.md

- Kingston KC3000
- Kingston Fury Renegade
- Samsung 990 Pro
- Seagate Firecuda 530
- Teamgroup MP44
- WD Black SN850X

In particular, we recommend purchasing NVMe M.2 instead of SATA as NVMe has higher throughput.

As of January 2025, the storage requirements for all node types are dominated by the need to store block history.
A 2TB disk can be used, however this is not recommended due to the rate of history growth and the uncertainty as to when EIP4444 will be complete.

### RAM

RAM/memory is dominated by state cache. As of January 2025, it is possible to run a full node with 16GB of RAM, however this has been known to not work with all combinations of EL and CL clients in the past.
We therefore recommend 32GB.

### Bandwidth

- Statista states that as of January 2024:
  - The global average download for broadband is 92 Mbps and the global average upload is 43 Mpbs.
  - The global average download for mobile is 50 Mbps and 11 Mbps
- GSMA report showing the state of mobile internet connectivity in 2024 shows that:
  - The mobile upload speeds in Higher Income Countries (HIC) is about 18 Mbps
  - The global average mobile download is 48 Mbps.

> 

Author: GSMA link is https://www.gsma.com/r/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/The-State-of-Mobile-Internet-Connectivity-Report-2024.pdf?utm_source=website&utm_medium=button&utm_campaign=somic24

Paghe 39 for the upload speeds of HIC and page 5 for the 48 Mbps figure.

Statista link is: https://www.statista.com/statistics/896779/average-mobile-fixed-broadband-download-upload-speeds/

Author: Let me know how you would want these to be referred to in the document

For example, if you are connected to peers whom have gigabit connections, but you yourself have subpar bandwidth, it may be sufficient for you to only send your data to the first peer and in the time it takes you to send data to your mesh, the first peer might have seeded the network.

The 25 Mbps was chosen as a buffer to account for these miscellaneous factors that are harder to predict for.

#### Validators using mev-boost

The recommendation for validators using mev-boost is the same as the recommendations for attesters.

#### Full nodes

For full nodes, whom want to follow the tip of the chain, we recommend 50 Mbps download and 15 Mbps upload.

Full nodes currently participate in sampling, however since they are not latency sensitive like attesters and block builders, we can lower their upload bandwidth requirement.

The download requirement is kept the same, so that they are able to follow the chain at the same speed as an attester.

Note: A full node will still be able to operate at significantly lower bandwidth requirements, however depending on the variance they may be at least a slot behind the chain.

## Backwards Compatibility

> This EIP is informational and requires no protocol changes. We recommend that future EIPs include an assessment of their impact on these hardware requirements.

Author: Would the recommendation here require another EIP if this gets finalized?

In any case, I don't think it belongs here since this section is explicitly about whether the EIP breaks backwards compatibility

---
title: Hardware and Bandwidth Recommendations for Validators and Full Nodes
description: System recommendations for Validators and Full nodes
author: Parithosh Jayanthi (@parithosh), Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Josh Rudolf (@jrudolf), Dankrad Feist (@dankrad), Justin Traglia (@jtraglia), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), George Kadianakis (@asn-d6)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Informational
created: 2025-01-26
requires: <EIP number(s)> # Only required when you reference an EIP in the `Specification` section. Otherwise, remove this field.
---

## Abstract

> This proposal specifies hardware and bandwidth requirements for full nodes and validators. Validators are split into attesters and proposers. The resource heavy component of proposing a block is creating it and broadcasting the necessary data needed to ensure that other attesters view the block as valid. We use the "block builder" to further emphasize this.

Reviewer: The title and description of the EIP use the word "recommendation". The title description in the PR and the very first sentence of the abstract use the word "requirement". 

Throughout the document these two are used interchangeably and it's not clear what's a recommendation or what is a requirement. For benchmarking reasons or for informed decision-making, is Ethereum meant to use the required system or the recommended one?

Author: Will clarify/clean up terminology in the doc tomorrow -- Essentially you can run your node with less than what is listed in the document and it may work fine, but benchmarks etc would be based off of what is listed in there. So merging this PR does not imply immediate changes are needed to ones setup

## Motivation

Clear system specifications are crucial for:

- Ensuring meaningful benchmark comparisons across different implementations
- Enabling informed decision-making about protocol upgrades and their hardware implications
- Providing clear guidance for node operators with respects to the future

Without a shared understanding of target hardware specifications:

- Benchmark results lose significance due to inconsistent testing environments
- Decision-making becomes challenging for implementation choices, as performance characteristics are heavily hardware dependent
- Network participants lack clear guidance for hardware investments

## Specification

### Recommended hardware and bandwidth specifications

> | Node type | Storage | RAM | CPU Cores | CPU Single Thread/Multithread rating | Download/Upload speed |

Reviewer 2: You should explain what is this "rating".

Author: Yep will do

- CPU Rating
  - Single Thread: 3903
  - Multithread: 30367

#### ASUS NUC 14 Pro

- 16 cores (6 performance + 8 efficiency cores + 2 Low power efficiency cores)
- 22 threads
- CPU Rating
  - Single Thread: 3520
  - Multithread: 25158

### Recommended Prebuild (Full node)

#### Raspberry Pi 5

- 4 core
- 4 threads
- CPU Rating
  - Single thread: 1487
  - Multithred: 3428

## Rationale

### Storage

For storage, we recommend the following SSDs:

- Kingston KC3000
- Kingston Fury Renegade
- Samsung 990 Pro
- Seagate Firecuda 530
- Teamgroup MP44
- WD Black SN850X

In particular, we recommend purchasing NVMe M.2 instead of SATA as NVMe has higher throughput.

As of January 2025, the storage requirements for all node types are dominated by the need to store block history.
A 2TB disk can be used, however this is not recommended due to the rate of history growth and the uncertainty as to when EIP4444 will be complete.

### RAM

RAM/memory is dominated by state cache. As of January 2025, it is possible to run a full node with 16GB of RAM, however this has been known to not work with all combinations of EL and CL clients in the past.

> On 32GB vs 64GB; 32GB works right now, however we recommend 64GB as [preliminary benchmarks](https://hackmd.io/@han/bench-hash-in-snark) have shown that zk-STARKS can consume a significant amount of memory and the difference in cost relative to the entire hardware setup for a validator is insignificant.

Author: I saw that EIPs 2926, 2938, 3298, 3416 and 3607 also used hackmd links however the contents of them can easily be changed, so I wonder if there is a rule about using them?

---
title: Hardware and Bandwidth Recommendations for Validators and Full Nodes
description: System recommendations for Validators and Full nodes
author: Parithosh Jayanthi (@parithosh), Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Josh Rudolf (@jrudolf), Dankrad Feist (@dankrad), Justin Traglia (@jtraglia), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), George Kadianakis (@asn-d6)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Informational
created: 2025-01-26
requires: <EIP number(s)> # Only required when you reference an EIP in the `Specification` section. Otherwise, remove this field.
---

## Abstract

> This proposal specifies hardware and bandwidth recommendations for full nodes and validators. Validators are split into attesters and proposers. The resource heavy component of proposing a block is creating it and broadcasting the necessary data needed to ensure that other attesters view the block as valid. We use the "block builder" to further emphasize this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This proposal specifies hardware and bandwidth recommendations for full nodes and validators. Validators are split into attesters and proposers. The resource-intensive aspect of block proposal lies in creating the block and broadcasting the data required for attesters to validate it. We use the "block builder" to further emphasize this.
```

Author: Github is not allowing to apply the changes because another change was added -- I will add these in the cli and put you as co-author

> We note that you may be able to run a client with less than the recommended specifications, however benchmarks and decision-making will be made with respects to these recommendations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We note that you may be able to run a client with less than the recommended specifications, however benchmarks and decision-making will be made with respect to these recommendations.
```

## Motivation

Clear system specifications are crucial for:

- Ensuring meaningful benchmark comparisons across different implementations
- Enabling informed decision-making about protocol upgrades and their hardware implications

> - Providing clear guidance for node operators with respects to the future

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Providing clear guidance for node operators with respect to the future
```

Without a shared understanding of target hardware specifications:

- Benchmark results lose significance due to inconsistent testing environments

> - Decision-making becomes challenging for implementation choices, as performance characteristics are heavily hardware dependent

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Decision-making becomes challenging for implementation choices, as performance characteristics are heavily hardware-dependent
```

- Network participants lack clear guidance for hardware investments

## Specification

### Recommended hardware and bandwidth specifications

| Node type | Storage | RAM | CPU Cores | CPU Single Thread/Multithread rating | Download/Upload speed |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | --------| -------- |--------|
| Full node     | 4TB     | 32GB    | 4 cores/8 threads  | 1000 / 3000 | 50 Mbps / 15 Mbps |
| Attester      | 4TB     | 64GB    | 8 cores/16 threads | 3500 / 25000 | 50 Mbps / 25 Mbps |
| Block builder | 4TB     | 64GB    | 8 cores/16 threads | 3500 / 25000 |  100 Mbps / 50 Mbps |

> - The CPU rating is a measure of how powerful a particular CPU is for single and multithreaded respectively. All numbers references are normalized according to PassMark.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The CPU rating is a measure of how powerful a particular CPU is for single and multithreaded respectively. All numbers referenced are normalized according to PassMark.
```
